In recent times, wearable devices have gained immense popularity for various pervasive computing and Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications, including sports analytics. Recent works in sports analytics primarily focus on improving a player's performance and help devise a winning strategy based on the player's strengths and weaknesses. In a racquet-based sport, it is often perceived that the way the racquet is being posed mostly influences the performance of the players. However, in this work, we posit that the stance and the posture of the players are also of equal importance. Indeed a perfect posture and stance allow a player not only to play a stroke efficiently by directing the shuttle to strategic spots but also making it difficult for the opponent to return the shot and score a point. Therefore, we hypothesize that the performance of a player equally correlates with the stance and the efficiency of handling the racquet. In this work, we propose DeepMinton, a data-driven framework to analyze the stance and posture of the badminton players based on the different shots that are played and rank them based on their performances. First, we employ machine learning algorithms to classify the strokes and stances of the players. Second, we propose a distance-based error metrics methodology to compare the stances of an intermediate and a novice player with that of a professional player. Third, we quantify the error between the professional player's stance with that of an intermediate and a novice player. Finally, we devise a deep convolutional regressor to predict the score of a shot, that helps rank the players based on their performances. We evaluate DeepMinton at Badminton courts in UMBC RAC (Retrievers Activities Center) using 4 Shimmer3 IMU Unit devices comprising of accelerometer sensors by placing on the dominant wrist, palm, and both the legs of the players. We collected the in-house data from 4 participants in an controlled setting and another set of dataset from seven participants, collected in an uncontrolled setting for 12 different frequently played shots. Empirical results indicate that DeepMinton achieves 89.09% accuracy for strokes classification and 88.84% accuracy to detect stance errors.


Dataset Link/ DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/n1e0-7c60


Please cite:

a) I. Ghosh, S. R. Ramamurthy and N. Roy, "StanceScorer: A Data Driven Approach to Score Badminton Player," 2020 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), 2020, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156220.

b) Indrajeet Ghosh, Sreenivasan Ramasamy Ramamurthy, Avijoy Chakma, Emon Dey, Zahid Hasan, Nirmalya Roy, July 23, 2020, "Badminton Activity Recognition (BAR)", IEEE Dataport, doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/n1e0-7c60.

